Theory: API, Services, Microservices (#7)
apisyouwonthate/book-build-apis-2: 1-theory/1-apis-services-microservices.adoc

= APIs, Services, and Microservices

Before we get too stuck into things we should probably get some terminology down so we arent just 
throwing around these terms interchangeably like the majority of developers.

== API

> The acronym API stands for “Application Program Interface”, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The acronym API stands for “Application Programming Interface”, and
```

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Application_programming_interface

about the utilization of network protocols such as HTTP, AMQP, etc., and instead of
command-line arguments or method parameters, we’re working with URLs, query string
parameters, or chunks of data (often JSON).

The goal of a Web API is to provide other applications with access to specific subset of
functionality and data that this application owns. Some APIs are public (anyone can get
the weather from api.weather.gov), some are private (it’s probably tough to get access
to JPMorgan Chase’s Enterprise Customers API), and some are a mixture.

APIs can give you data for a single-page JavaScript application, handle payment
information so you don’t have to worry about storing credit card details, post a
Facebook status on a users timeline, or share the same data across a myriad of different
devices. Watch that Netflix show on your Xbox, it’s all good, APIs have you covered.

APIs are built by all sorts of folks; maybe another company, some large like Google or
Facebook, startups, governments, or charity organizations. They could also be
coworkers on another team, or another department, on another floor (or continent).

== Service

> A service is another very overloaded term in computer science, and programming in genral. A lot 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A service is another very overloaded term in computer science, and programming in general. A lot 
```

of developers are used to MVC (Model, View, Controller) and a service is just "any code that didnt
fit into a model, view, or controller". 

> When folks talk about services in API-land, they are usually talking about "Service-orientated Architecture".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When folks talk about services in API-land, they are usually talking about "Service-oriented Architecture".
```

Orientated or oriented? Wikipedia wins? Since we're being picky about names in this chapter I feel fully validated to point out this boring inconsistency (and another one on line 44) :D

[quote,Wikipedia,https://wikipedia.org/wiki/Service-oriented_architecture]
____
Service-oriented architecture (SOA) is a style of software design where services are provided to the other components by application components, through a communication protocol over a network. The basic principles of service-oriented architecture are independent of vendors, products and technologies. A service is a discrete unit of functionality that can be accessed remotely and acted upon and updated independently, such as retrieving a credit card statement online.

A service has four properties according to one of many definitions of SOA:

- It logically represents a business activity with a specified outcome.
- It is self-contained.
- It is a black box for its consumers.
- It may consist of other underlying services.

SOA was first termed Service-Based Architecture in 1998 by a team developing integrated foundational management services and then business process-type services based upon units of work and using CORBA for inter-process communications. 
____

> Service-orientated architecture is essentially the idea of taking various modules out of your application, and putting them on a different server, 

Reviewer 3: I think my confusion in

https://twitter.com/ramimassoud/status/1103127686103396353

is based on my misunderstanding of the definition of SOA in [SOA Patterns](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1933988266/)

> _Service-oriented architecture_ (SOA) is an architectural style for building systems based on interactions of loosely coupled, coarse-grained, and autonomous components called _services_. Each service exposes processes and behavior through _contracts_, which are composed of _messages_ at discoverable addresses called _endpoints_. A service's behavior is governed by policies that are external to the service itself. The contracts and messages are used by external components called _service consumers_.

I haven't been able to dig into the book yet, so that's likely most of my issue. You're right when you said

> Even if they live on the same server they’re using the local network interface so that’s a technicality.

and I think even if two services communicated over a Unix socket, that's the same deal. I was wondering if you could still call it SOA if you did (what I think Shopify does?) and broke down functionality in a Rails app into Rails Engines and Gems? At least as long as the different components didn't rely on global shared access to the DB and they had to communicate with each other through defined APIs/methods.

With all that said, maybe ditching talking about servers would clarify a bit?

```suggestion
Service-oriented architecture is essentially the idea of breaking various pieces of functionality out of your application and into their own autonomous applications
```

Author: I've loosened the paragraph a bit based on this feedback:

> Service-oriented architecture is essentially the idea of breaking various
modules out of your application, possibly putting them on different servers, with a
network interface or socket facilitating communication.

I dunno what Shopify are doing but based on your description it sounds like theyre just sharing some reusable code via gems, thats not really SoA in this sense. You could call it that, but you can call anything anything. :)

with a network protocol in the way. Instead of having one application that handles user directories, billing, messaging, shipping, inventories, etc., 
you have miltiple applications which handle one of those things independently.

// TODO Diagram of example SoA, with a web app, mobile app, billing, user service, messaging service, etc

There are a few benefits to SoA over creating one single giant application, so long as your team is qualified in handling the complications that come with it.

One big example is reducing the effects of certain compliance restrictions. Financial standards like PCI might impose a lot of ruling around systems that store credit cards, so if the entire application has access to this data directly the whole application will need to be PCI compliant. If you split out the billing logic to its own service, then potentially only the billing service has to worry about being compliat.  

> Other compliance standards like SOX can impose strict rules on how deployments happen, multi-step review processes with multiple stakeholders signing off, who has access to what, etc. I´ve worked at 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Other compliance standards like SOX can impose strict rules on how deployments happen, multi-step review processes with multiple stakeholders signing off, rigorous access control, etc. I've worked at 
```

Even if compliance isn´t an issue, comminicating over the network through standardized protocals make it possible for different
services to be written in different programming languages or different frameworks. Instead of using the same language for everything, you 
can use the right tool for the job, selecting a programming language that has strengths for certain tasks.

WARNING: One thing to be wary of here is that some developers get a little giddy when told they can "use whatever language you like", finally giving CoolNewLanguage™ a try, even though the are not
very experienced with it. Not only will that make it hard to maintain for that developer, it might also make it hard to find other developers
who can help maintain it. If management are not careful, a company just getting into SoA can have 20 services in 20 different languages, and 
this increases the danger of "Bus Factor" more than my 8 mile bike commute in NYC. 

> The positives are fairly clear, but an often overlooked problem with service-orientated arcitecture is the complexity of managing multiple services, and not just the comlpications of handling "more servers". Managing two services is not twice as hard as managing a single application, it is infinitely more complex, and you need people who know how to handle these issues. 

Reviewer 3: Maybe mention the increase in difficulty of debugging issues that span multiple services. Also, the need for tooling and instrumentation that is harder to understand than being able to step through code with a debugger

Author: Got it!

The pros usually outweigh the cons so long as you have good devops culture, or dedicated sysops people, but SoA is not a merry world of unicorns as some would have you believe.

Anyway, these applications need to interact with each other, and their clients need to interact with them, otherwise they 
probably arent really doing anything. The interaction could happen in a bunch of different ways over the network, 
but again that is usually over HTTP, AMQP, or some other messaging protocol. The interaction is by definition a form of API. 

So, an API and a service are not different things. A service will always have some form of API, but not all APIs are a service...

// TODO figure out where to put this, got it approved https://twitter.com/dhelper/status/1101140486130159617?s=12

== Microservice

> Microservices as a term was coined to be a meaningful off-shoot of SoA, and has has been floating around more and more since 2011. As an off-shoot, many of the same pros and cons of SoA apply, with a few more pros and cons to mention on top.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Microservices as a term was coined to be a meaningful off-shoot of SoA, and has been floating around more and more since 2011. As an off-shoot, many of the same pros and cons of SoA apply, with a few more pros and cons to mention on top.
```

> Most of the time when somebody uses the word microservice, they just mean a service, even if there is nothing micro about them. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Most of the time when somebody uses the word microservice, they just mean a service, even if there is nothing micro about it. 
```

Generally when you hear a developer call a service a monolith, it means that developer thinks the service is doing too many things. If you hear a developer call it a microservice, it means they think it is doing just the right amount. The same service could be referred to with both terms, depending on who you ask. 

When attempting to construct a more consistent definition, it is useful to imagine a single application again. Earlier we described 
an application being broken into multiple services, it was like it was having modules (groups of similar functionality) broken out, 
so a service for billing, messaging, shipping, inventories, etc. 

With microserives, instead of the break down happening at the module level, it happens at the library level. So instead of having
a billing service which has a class to handle the initation of a payment attempt called "ChargeService", there would be a 

> microservice called `charge-service` which literally does the interactions with the payment gateway and nothing much else. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
microservice called `charge-service` which literally does the interactions with the payment gateway and nothing else. 
```

calling it. SoA means going over the network to another server, and that server
might have changed its IP or domain name. It could be out of capacity, or have
crashed entirely. Maybe the team who manages it deployed some changes and didn't
tell you, and the test suite for your API is not aware of their changes
either...

The pros usually outweigh the cons so long as there is a good devops culture, or
dedicated sysops people, but SoA is not a merry world of unicorns as some would
have you believe.

Anyway, these services need to interact with each other, and their clients need
to interact with them. The interaction could happen in a bunch of different ways
over the network, but these days it is usually over HTTP, AMQP, or some other
messaging protocol. The interaction is by definition a form of API.

*An API and a service are not different things. A service will always have
some form of API, but not all APIs are a service.*

Some APIs could have a more descriptive name than service: like function, or
database.

.https://twitter.com/adamralph[Adam Ralph] at https://ndcporto.com/[NDC Porto 2019]. Photo credit https://twitter.com/dhelper[Dror Helper].

> image::./images/service-is-not.jpg[Adam Ralph points out that a service with the only functionality bering a function is not a service, its a function. A service which nly exposes data is a database. Adding some HTTP in front does not change its name.]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
image::./images/service-is-not.jpg[Adam Ralph points out that a service with the only functionality bering a function is not a service, its a function. A service which only exposes data is a database. Adding some HTTP in front does not change its name.]
```
